So now that we know what pure functions are,
let's dive into factory functions. Pretty unrelated to pure functions but still an important concept.
The idea behind factory functions is that you have a function that produces another function,
now that might sound strange but it makes more sense once we see an example.
Let's say we're building a web application, some accounting software where as part of that software, we
need to show various tax amounts
and of course as you know, we got different taxes based on which amount we're working with, for our
revenue we might need the value added tax, for our profit before tax we might need the income tax or the
corporate tax. Now the tax calculation typically always is the same.
If we had a function, calculate tax, then we probably would have a function that receives a tax rate and
an amount and then we just return amount times tax,
something like that, that could be a function that calculates a tax, of course it's a trivial function
but you get the idea.
Now the problem is if we have our value added tax amount, we might need to call calculate tax with our
amount, 100
and the tax rate of let's say 90%, so 0.9. For our income tax, we might need to call calculate tax
with an amount of 100 and 0.25 or whatever.
Now of course it's fine to do it like that and because it's a trivial function, it definitely seems doable
to call it like that
but what if you needed that amount in different parts of your software? Then you need to call the functions
with these tax rates in different parts of the software.
Now that's where a factory function can be helpful.
You would create another function which you could call create tax calculator, so I try to make it clear
by the function name that this function will return something which then does something for us
and in this function, we create another function, as you learned
you can have functions in functions, so we can move that calculates tax function into the create tax
calculator function. So now we have that function in there
and now the interesting thing is the create tax calculator function could take our tax parameter and
we can therefore actually remove it from that internal function
because of that scope thing too which I'll come back in the next lectures as well, a function in a
function can access everything which is available outside of that inner function,
so that tax parameter which we have in the outer function can be used in the inner function as well
and therefore now here, we have our tax calculator function as part of that outer function.
Now here in the outer function, we can return calculate tax
and I don't return the result of it,
so I don't
execute it,
instead I just return a pointer at this function.
Now what's the benefit of that?
Well now we return a function which expects an amount as an input but which doesn't need the tax percentage
as an input.
So now what we can do is we can create a vat calculator or name it calculate vat amount and that
simply is a call to create tax calculator where we pass in the vat percentage and then we might have
our income tax amount which we create with create tax calculator, .25 as an argument.
So now what I in the end store here and I should name this calculate income tax amount,
so what I store here are in the end
two functions, this constant holds a function, it holds this inner function configured for this percentage
and this here also holds the inner function but configured with a different percentage because I call
the outer function twice,
so it runs separately two times, with different arguments for the tax,
so different values for the tax argument and therefore this inner function is recreated two times,
once for every execution of the outer function
and every time it logs in the tax percentage of that outer function which differs for the two executions
and therefore the function which we return is this preconfigured inner function with the logged in
tax amount and hence
now if I console log calculate vat amount for 100 and then again I repeat this for let's say
200, I just need to call this calculate vat amount function like this without passing in the
value added tax percentage over and over again because I configured this once here with the help of
this factory function and we're good to go thereafter.
So if we save that and we reload, I get my different value added tax amounts.
So that's the idea behind factory functions,
if you have a certain function which you call multiple times in different parts of your app and it can
be preconfigured in a certain way
so that calling it is easier and you don't need to repeat yourself as often because our second argument
would always be the same here if we would expect two arguments as we did earlier, in such a case, a factory
function can be convenient and can save you time and code.